Welcome to The Test Set. Here we talk with some of the brightest thinkers and tinkerers
in statistical analysis, scientific computing, and machine learning. Dig into what makes
them tick, plus the insights, experiments, and OMG moments that shape the field.
In this episode, we talk with Mike Bostock, creator of the visualization library D3, one
of the top three starred GitHub repos through much of the 2010s. He was graphics editor
at the New York Times, and he founded Observable, whose Reactive Notebooks handle the whole
of his process from end to end. We talk about his journey into visualization, which was
heavily influenced by his early time on the Google search quality team, where feature
decisions often came down to a single number that was heavily debated, and how notebooks
are sort of an attempt to crack open all the computation that goes into visualization.
And of course, we end talking about AI agents and the future of notebooks. I'm so excited
to bring this interview to folks. And so with that, Mike Bostock.
All right, Mike, welcome to The Test Set. We're so excited to have you on. So you're
Mike Bostock, creator of D3, and you were the graphics editor at New York Times, and
now a founder at Observable, where you build powerful tools for visualizing data through
code, UI, and AI. Yeah, thank you so much for coming on.
It's my pleasure. It's great to be here.
And I'm joined by co-hosts, Hadley Wickham, who's chief scientist at Posit, and Isabel,
who's just an incredible software engineer at Posit, and graciously agreed to come. Yeah.
As people can see, especially the people listening via podcast, we're in beautiful San Francisco.
If you can't see the video, we're actually on the Golden Gate Bridge, and we're surrounded
by birds. It's a beautiful day. So we're so happy to have you.
Mike, I feel like you've done so much. And as I talk to colleagues about D3, I feel like
there's this incredible history of D3. So I'd love to talk a bit about how you got there
and built D3. And then I know there's a lot you've talked about on open source and AI
and your work with Observable. I was curious if you could just catch us up a bit on some
of the history of D3 and your work there. Sure. I do like to build tools and have been
doing it for a while. And I think a lot of my ideas for tools come out of frustrations
using existing tools, or in some ways a desire to understand how those existing tools are
built or why they were built the way they were built. For D3 specifically, I was doing
a lot of work in browsers, in SVG, using JavaScript, using the DOM API. And in particular,
the DOM API is very verbose. And if you're doing stuff with SVG, there's this namespace
URL that you have to remember to create an SVG element or to set xlink href attribute
and stuff like that. And so it was just difficult to remember this specific URL. I mean, I remember
it now because I've repeated it so many times. And just to zoom way out, D3, you're making
like beautiful visualizations in SVG. Is that? Yeah. So the goal with D3, I mean, and there
are other libraries that I worked on that kind of predate that. But I think D3 specifically
was focused on kind of interaction and animation and transitions and performance. And I think
in many ways, like a lot of its success came out of being at the right place in the right
time kind of thing. So it really builds on web standards. So these standards exist already
or existed already, SVG and Canvas, and of course, the DOM API, as I mentioned. But in
many ways, they were very tedious to use. And so the goal for D3 was to build on those
technologies, like let you leverage all of those capabilities, but make it much easier
for you to get started, make it much more, you know, performant, I guess, like maintain
that performance capabilities, but make it easier for you to use it. There's also an
element to D3 that's about kind of all of the visualization techniques and just kind
of packaging those up in a reusable way. So like the tree map, squarified tree map algorithm,
for example, like that's fairly tedious to write yourself, like to read the paper and
to implement it yourself. And there were some existing implementations of that that predate
D3. But what I wanted to do with D3 is to try to think about like, what is the kind
of purest encapsulation of that algorithm in a way that's independent of how you display
it. So like the layout algorithms in D3 are all like data space. They're just like data
in data out. They don't dictate how you display it, like whether you're using SVG or Canvas
or WebGL or anything else, or even like React, whatever you want to do. So I want to try
to like decompose it into these composable pieces. So that, and I think that helps contribute
to its longevity.
I mean, maybe you had the same experience as me. It's like reading these viz papers
would be like a cool visualization. And they provide software, but the software does that
visualization and like nothing else. And then you're like, well, I'd like to combine it
with this other visualization. And there's just like no like connection.
And they're really fun to work on as well. Like the circle packing algorithm, I think
has been the most fun one that I worked on. And they have these like fun diagrams that
show how they work, how they kind of build out these layouts progressively. And you can
kind of work on them and you get these really satisfying animations as it's iterating over
the layout. And yeah, like packaging them up so that it's easy for people to reuse that's
not tied to like any implementation artifact that's in a paper has all of these kind of
somewhat arbitrary choices of what language it's in, or what other kind of parameters
or UI that's around it. And so it is fun as a kind of a software engineering puzzle to
think about like, what is the most reusable version of this implementation? And in a way
like that is kind of the art of open source is like, how do you take a complex problem
and kind of pare it down to its essence so that people can then use your solution or
use your tool in as many cases as possible.
You talked about this a little bit in your lessons from like 10 years of open source
too, but there's also that like, this is like a hard problem and I've solved it and it feels
very satisfying. And then sometimes you're like, well, like, was this actually a problem
that needed to be solved? Or like, does this actually like move the needle? Like, do you
like, how do you like some of the, there's definitely the aspect of like, this is a fun
challenge and I've like nailed it and like, Oh, I've done something useful. And those
are like, sometimes totally.
Sure. Yeah. I mean, I think you want to have both your intrinsic motivation and your extrinsic
motivation. So I think it's definitely fun to work on stuff that you just enjoy. Like
if there's an interesting puzzle of you, like implementing this algorithm, like, and great,
like just do that. And I think a lot of that's kind of the beauty of open source is that
you can work a lot of these things that are, you're just intrinsically motivated to work
on. And then if other people find it useful, now you have an extrinsic motivation to like
continue to develop it, right? Because you've got this community, you've got this user
base, they're excited about it as well. And they're giving you ideas of what it can do
next or ways that you can make it easier to use. So that's good, you know, validation.
And you, I'm really curious in terms of the open source, would you sort of like set the
stage? Because I know you did like proto-viz, I think before D3, like, what was it like
basically? How did you get into viz? What was it like sort of starting with proto-viz
and open source? What was that experience like?
Sure. Well, getting into viz happened much earlier. So I think the first time I really
got interested in visualization in a professional capacity, I was working at Google and I was
in the search quality evaluation team. And the evals team is, their job is to kind of
take all of these experiments that the search quality team is doing, like these potential
changes to ranking or like new signals that can be incorporated and try to empirically
assess, you know, what the impact will be, like, is this improving quality or not? And at
the time, you know, the main outcome of these evals was a number, you know, a number
between one and five. And the idea is like, if your experiment scored like 4.1 or higher,
you know, you got to launch. And if it was lower than that, then you had to go back and
kind of make some improvements. And the problem was, you know, as is always the case,
like there's human opinions and personalities involved. And every time you're working on
some change to ranking or whatever, like there are certain things that you're trying to
do and maybe other things that you're not thinking about so much. And I found that a
lot of the discussions around whether we should launch something or not could devolve
into like debating whether the eval metric was good, like, or whether it didn't kind of
sufficiently capture the unique nature of this experiment.
This one number.
Yeah, yeah. You're just arguing over a number. And it's like, well, this, you know, the
argument was more about the evals being flawed than the kind of the nature of the
experiment. So what I was interested in is like, how can we surface all of this information
that we're collecting about these experiments? So some of it was, you know, kind of a, b,
whatever, you can do, you can do experiments where you actually launch it and you see what
the effect is on real human users.
But we would also do stuff with human readers where we have sort of test sets or query
test sets. And we would kind of ask them, like, is this improving the quality?
Like, is this a better result for this query?
Is this a better result set for this query?
And so we had all of this information, and by surfacing that information, partly through visualization...
I think we helped the engineers better understand what the impact of their changes was, and
then they could spend more time actually debating that, right, and highlight maybe some of the
unexpected consequences of their experiments.
And this is, this is like 2003-ish?
Um, yeah, so I think 2005, 2006, something like that.
Are you, in this case, are you using like JavaScript since —
Java, actually.
Although I did start getting into some web-based — I think one of the first
things I did was using XSLT, which is really going to date me, but there was
this cool like XML transformation style sheet kind of thing, and you could, yeah,
I guess we would generate like XML outputs from the data and then like
transform them into a webpage, and so it was another way of doing it.
But yeah, I think some of the first visualizations that I did were actually
in Java, um, and yeah, I didn't get into kind of the JavaScript — well, so
actually, no, I should correct myself.
In 1999, I was like, I did a summer internships, a kind of a Netscape, um,
and I wrote for their developer website.
So there is actually — not even 1999, I think it's actually
like 1998 or something like that.
I wrote a, my first JavaScript visualization library, um, like
pre-Canvas, pre-SVG, pre-everything.
It could only like render a table element, and it had to use like an
invisible one-by-one — it actually had three one-by-one GIFs.
There was like a transparent one, a blue one, and a red one.
And you just did like horrible things using just the HTML table element, and
it could produce, I think, only a bar chart.
Are you saying it's like, it's like a grid?
It just made a grid and now it's filling it in with red and blue and transparent?
Like, cause there wasn't even — there was very difficult to do graphics
in the browser in that time.
And so you, but you could kind of approximate, um, exact pixel
positioning by using the table element.
Um, and so I did terrible things in order to produce these very rudimentary bar charts.
But yeah, I think that, you know, I've, so I've always had an interest in, in
helping people understand data through visualization and the talk technology
was not really there at the time, but you know, 20 years later or something,
it's, it's really quite impressive.
Yeah.
It's so interesting.
I mean, even you described a little bit like SVG, even at a little time later
being tricky to use too, but probably less tricky than a table with
like three one-by-one, uh, images in it.
For sure.
And I think, you know, it's not in a sense, like a flaw in the design.
I think like it's, it's really helpful to have these, um, kind of formal and
very precise, um, APIs that you can then build whatever you want on top of it.
Um, so, you know, D3 is obviously a very opinionated way and a specialized
way of constructing the DOM.
And so it's not in a sense, like better than the DOM API.
It's just, it's much more specialized, focused on how do you transform the
DOM to conform to a particular data set?
How do you describe transformations to the DOM?
Um, and so I think, you know, what my interest, I guess, is in this more.
It's, I guess it's design, right?
It's like, how do you create software interfaces that are more accessible to
humans, that they can understand how to use them effectively and use them
efficiently?
Yeah.
And going from, you know, tables and then SVGs and all of this, do you feel like
there's something that you wish you had learned way at the beginning that would
have made this entire experience better?
Or is it just the nature of changing software?
I mean, I, I'm sure I've learned lots of things along the way.
I think maybe one of the biggest lessons from D3 is kind of the value of the
ecosystem, like the web standards, like I mentioned, um, you know, this ability to
interoperate and be compatible with and use the tool in conjunction with all of
these other tools.
So when we wrote the D3 paper, I think in some ways it was controversial, um, because
it was coming after the Protoviz paper.
And in a way it was rejecting a bunch of the ideas from Protoviz.
Um, and I think one of the things that was heretical about it was this idea that, you
know, you don't need a specialized representation for information
visualization.
Um, and instead it's better to pick kind of a bog standard, um, you know, the DOM
API, SVG, something that's not specialized to visualization and just use that even
though it's not kind of designed with visualization in mind, but you get so many
advantages from interoperating with browser technology, like being able to use your
style sheets or being able to use the browser's dev tools, or being able to kind
of integrate with, uh, React or other like DOM APIs.
And so I think the, you know, from the research community, I think those kind of
practical benefits of the technology weren't as obvious.
And so it was somewhat, uh, heretical to come in there and saying like, let's not try
to build a specialized representation, but just take this thing that exists already and
focus on kind of the more practical benefits of like how it gets put into practice.
Cause people never use these tools in isolation.
They're always using them with all sorts of other things.
I mean, it's like, it's hard to remember now, but this is also like, like this
JavaScript was kind of like a joke language.
Like this is still, it was still a joke language at the time, like it was slow.
You're saying compared to R.
But just like, it wasn't like people didn't consider it a real programming language
and like how all these performance issues, but like you clearly could have sort of saw
like, Hey, the browser is going to be really important for visualization.
Like let's, that's right.
Yeah.
It on that.
And I obviously like JavaScript has made tremendous strides in terms of its
performance and its capabilities.
And it's kind of nothing like it was, you know, 20 years ago, but I think from my
side, like it was always inevitable that that would happen because, you know, it
really is the, the interface that all human beings are like interacting with their
computers, with their displays of data.
Like it's really hard to compete with the convenience of delivery through
the web, like through browsers.
Yeah.
Like, I think an interesting, like, I was just kind of thinking, like, imagine a
world where you were like, I love Java applets, I'm going to like invest in that.
But in some ways that that's a little bit like processing, which was kind of
around a similar time, like the, not, not for visual, like more of like art, like a
system for programming art that was really all in on like Java applets, I think that
was, and, you know, and I think that's still thrive is still thriving today, but
if had to like make a lot of like technological leaps to kind of stay for
like D3, I think there is something inherently beautiful about kind of HTML
and the DOM, this idea that it is not kind of an opaque representation of a
graphical user interface, but in fact is something that you can inspect and then
even manipulate.
So there's all sorts of benefits to the user from that.
I mean, like ad blockers is probably the most obvious one, but like screen readers
or other accessibility improvements.
And like, it just, it is dramatically different than an application that, for
example, just draws to like a pixel buffer or whatever, that just is a array of RGP
values effectively.
And I think that is key to its success.
And do you think it helps that like, you can go in and like inspect, like you can go
into a D3, like inspect this DOM and be like, oh, okay, there's now I understand
like what's going on.
And, you know, that's how I got into programming in the first place, like growing
up and like seeing web pages.
I mean, you can't really do it these days.
Cause there's like 35 megabytes, minified.
Yeah.
But in the old days, you know, you could go to a website and you could just like click on
the menu and view source and they'd be like, how did you do this?
You know?
And it would be right there, kind of obvious.
You could inspect it.
You could learn from it.
And so there are some challenges now with the complexity of modern development, but
even so like, yeah, the ability to kind of inspect the SVG and kind of see how it's
structured, like definitely gives you some, some clues.
And then with D3 in particular, I've enjoyed sometimes like it, you bind the data to the
elements.
So using the dev tools, you can actually see the data structures that people are using
in their charts.
And that's kind of fun to understand how they work also.
Yeah.
I, one thing I'm curious to, to hit on is, the popularity of D3.
As I looked back, someone mentioned, I think, D3 was like one of the top starred
GitHub repos.
Yeah.
Is that?
It was number three at one point.
Okay.
After like Bootstrap and React, I think was the other one.
Yeah.
But yeah, it was very popular.
And I think at one point I've heard that just a tremendous amount of traffic was going
to the D3 wiki.
So I think one of, one of the things that made, I think that helped D3 grow as a
community was the fact that the, all the documentation was just an editable, publicly
editable wiki on GitHub.
So anybody could go in there and like people contributed translations to all
different languages, as well as kind of like fixing typos and stuff like that.
But I think the thing that had the most kind of momentum around it was the gallery.
So it started with just some thumbnails of examples that I had made, often ones that
imported from Protoviz, but there was this kind of rite of passage in the D3
community where people would learn D3 and maybe the first or second or whatever
visualization that they made, they would take a screenshot of it and they would add
it to the gallery.
And so very quickly there were like a thousand examples that various people had
contributed and you just went there and it was this overwhelming display of kind of all
the different cool things that people were building.
A lot of them were like animated GIFs as well.
So you would see things moving around.
Unfortunately, then once it became popular, you know, spammers started putting links in
their like malware and stuff and it just became unmanageable.
So I had to take that down.
Yeah.
Was that a precursor because I know you had blocks, is that right?
Could you explain a little bit about what blocks?
Okay, so I was making all these examples to help people learn D3.
And very often, when people would ask questions, so we had the Google Groups mailing list.
which is the primary way that people would ask questions. I think now it's more on GitHub
discussions and that sort of thing. But people would ask a question, I'd be like, okay, I'm
going to make an example for you that shows you how to do this. And it just kind of became
difficult to manage all of those examples. And so I started to build some machinery around making it
easier for me to manage those examples. Because I didn't want to kind of keep uploading them to
a website. And even just naming, like the folder name started to become difficult to come up with
a good name for these things when you have like a thousand examples. So I started using GitHub Gist,
which is just like a very lightweight Git repo that has just a randomly generated giant hex
string as its name. And you could put an index.html file in there. But what I needed was just a way to
like actually render that HTML page. And so blocks, which is bl.ocks.org, is just a viewer for GitHub
Gists. And so you could then have a URL, you give it a Gist ID, and people could go look at that
example, and it would show you the source code below. And so that kind of became the primary
way that I started sharing examples. And of course, since it was on GitHub Gist, anybody else could
start sharing their examples as well. Do I remember it was like bl.ocks, and then it was like also
bostock? Yeah, so bostock. So I bought the ocks.org domain name just because it was nice and
short. And then I can put whatever other domains on it or hosts on it.
Yeah, it's such an interesting one. I know you talked about in your 10 years of open source,
I'm curious your thoughts on how do you approach documentation?
Well, that feedback loop is, I think, the most exciting, most valuable, most powerful thing about
open source, where you're putting something out there, and then you get to see how people use it.
And they're asking you, like, how do I do this? Or how do I do that? Or they're complaining about
something or whatever, or they're giving you ideas. And being in that feedback loop, getting
all of those new ideas is what really helps you advance the tool, make the tool better,
because you understand the problems that people are running into, and the ideas that they have
of other stuff that you can add, and that other people can then benefit from once you've incorporated
it into the tool. And so documentation is part of that. But I think examples has been another huge
part of that. And in many ways, I think people view the D3 examples as kind of more of what D3 is
than D3 itself, if that makes sense. I think there was something that I read once that talked about
all the different chart types that were supported in D3. And I was like, no, you've got it all wrong.
Like there aren't chart types in D3. But what they're thinking of is the examples that you
provide. And they can just be copied and adapted with new data that's being put into it or whatever.
And so I think the examples, as I've written before, they serve multiple purposes. And
sometimes it's kind of giving you example code, like helping you get started with something,
showing you how to use something. Sometimes it's inspirational, where you're just showing what's
possible, kind of the breadth of possibilities in a particular tool, and kind of getting people
excited about what they could be doing with it. Yeah, you give a talk about examples. Yeah,
I found that like really, that was like really influential for me and like guided a lot. I think
a lot of the R package docs. Yeah, like people, people don't really want to read the docs,
right? They just want to scroll, find something that looks like what they want and like modify.
Yeah. I mean, especially if you're making a visualization tool, you know, you have to show
people the visualizations to get them excited about its capabilities. So that's always been
front and center in what I've done. I think the interesting now with AI is whether that demand,
for examples, will still be there in a sense, or like whether people will ask the agents essentially
to construct the example that they want at the time that they want it. So one of the things that
people struggle with, with the examples, like if there's an example, that's exactly what you want,
then great. But, you know, the whole idea of D3 is that it can be really expressive and do
all sorts of things. So you typically don't want just that example and use it off the shelf. Like
maybe you like this example, and then there's another technique from another example and
another and so on. And you kind of want to stitch them together to build the thing that's unique to
you. It can be hard to do that, particularly if you're new to D3 or if you're new to programming,
but models agents are really good at kind of fitting those two things together. So it's good
in empowering people, but it also, I think, is a little bit worrisome from the open source
community perspective where there's not as much of an incentive for users to come read the
documentation, to come look at the examples or to share their own examples or to ask for help,
because they can just kind of ask an agent for those things. Do you feel like your strategy
for documentation has changed with the age of AI? No, because I'm stubborn maybe or slow.
I mean, I know that there are people that are doing like llms.txt or whatever and like trying
to make it even more easily consumable by AI. But I think, you know, my attitude is I don't really
want to write documentation specifically for agents or for existing models. I mean, for one
reason, like they're going to change all the time. And so if you overfit to whatever the current
models are, when the next model comes out, like it may not work as well. And so in that sense,
I would want to build something more durable. And so if it works for the models, then great.
But I also want it to be understandable by humans and trying to teach humans. And it can be a really
good forcing function to figure out or at least another kind of feedback mechanism to figure out
like how to explain something to somebody. Like how do I articulate when you should use a certain
argument or option and plot or not? You know, you can very quickly evaluate that with the agent,
whereas like actually doing that with humans is much more expensive or slower because you have
to put it out there and see what they do or do user research and stuff like that.
Yeah, makes sense. I'm curious what your setup is like when you're working. You mentioned like
working with agents and their use of examples. What does your setup look like when you're
developing? Sure. I mean, a lot of it is unobservable for sharing these examples these
days. So, you know, when I'm publishing D3 examples, I'm doing it as an observable notebook
and we're sharing it on the D3 whatever page on observable. For like application development,
like when we're building observable, I use Z as my primary editor and it does have like an agent
built in there. But I think, you know, I don't maybe I feel embarrassed like admitting this in
the public, but like I don't, you know, I don't use cloud code to do a lot of like vibe coding
stuff right now. I think I do use agents often kind of as a substitute for searching the web
or looking up documentation. I mean, there's so many tools that we're using right now.
It's impossible for you to kind of have the API reference memorized for every tool that you're
using. And so in the past, you know, I would search the web for, you know, how do I do this?
Maybe it's Stack Overflow, maybe it's the official documentation, that sort of thing.
But with agents, you know, they can often surface example code that helps you understand how to use
an API. And so it's not kind of writing the whole thing for you, but it is filling in
gaps in your knowledge and then you can test it and see if it's doing what you want to do.
Yeah, I found it so useful for like for dbply, which translates dply syntax into SQL, like,
oh, I want to know what this syntax looks like across 10 different database backends.
And like previously, I would have been doing a bunch of like Googling, like trying to
we weighed my way through the official docs. And like, you get the answer in the end,
but like Claude just does it all in parallel. And then it just makes me a nice little table.
And like, even if it's only like 90% correct, like it's still saved me so much time.
And it can often surface APIs that you didn't even know existed,
you wouldn't know to go look for it.
Yeah, I'm curious, you mentioned working in the observable notebook,
this might be a good chance for us to explain what observable notebooks are a little bit.
Even with, I'm even curious, this sort of move from like D3, working on D3 to founding
observable, what that looked like.
So, you know, my interest in building tools in general is like, how do you take these
valuable skills, expertise, practices, and make them more broadly accessible.
And a big part of that for me has been programming, like most of the tools that I build are
programming tools, programming libraries. I love the power of code, the generality of code,
kind of these compositional primitives that you can deploy in all sorts of interesting
and creative ways. It's not like there are six chart types with whatever 10 options each
or something like that. You can really have a lot of flexibility in what you create and
not just visualization too. I mean, again, visualization is not just kind of a thing
that you do in isolation. It's like, what data are you using? And how are you kind of
modeling or transforming that data into kind of an interesting representation that you
can then visualize? And then how are you sharing that visualization or distributing it?
There's all sorts of other tasks that go alongside visualization. So I love the power of
code, but of course, it is difficult to use. Let's be honest, there's a lot of things that
you need to learn. And so I've always been interested in how can I make code more accessible
and then how can I make visualization more accessible? So, you know, we were talking
about blocks.org earlier as a way for people or as a way for me to share examples and then
other people would share examples as well. But, you know, one of the issues of that is
still very much a local development environment, right? You typically would git clone a GitHub
gist. You'd have a web server running locally. You would use your code editor. You know,
those are some barriers to entry in order to just get started.
And so, what I wanted was something that was web-based, where you wouldn't have to install
anything.
You would just go to the webpage, and not only would you see the example, but you could
edit it.
You know, you could change the code, you could replace the data, you could do kind of any
number of things, because it's an entire development environment that runs in your browser.
And furthermore, like a social, collaborative development environment, where you could share
what you've built, you could import code from other examples, and stuff like that.
And that comes from the open-source mindset, where working out in the public lets people
kind of inspire each other, and share techniques, and in general, kind of advances the state
of the art much faster than anything that doesn't have that same level of collaboration.
So Observable started as this way of like, how can I make programming more accessible?
Like moving it to the web, so you don't need any development environment.
But it was also, in a way, like rethinking some of the aspects of programming.
So yes, it's a computational notebook, you know, like Jupyter, you have cells, you can
run cells, and they can display things, and they can compute values.
But I think one of the key differences, one of the key innovations of the Observable notebook
was reactivity.
This idea, like in a spreadsheet, where you don't have to manually run the cells, that
instead, it understands the topological relationships.
So if you declare a variable in one cell, and then you reference it in another cell,
when you redefine that variable, any referencing cell runs automatically.
And it's just like kind of a bookkeeping thing, in a sense, where like, you as the author
of your program, don't have to remember to keep rerunning things, or worry about being
in this kind of inconsistent state where you've changed the code, but you've forgotten to
rerun certain downstream cells, and so like, it's not matching up what you expect.
So like, spreadsheet programming, I think, has made that form of programming much more
accessible.
But you only have these tiny little cells that can produce numbers, and in a sense,
I just wanted bigger cells that could produce graphical outputs as well.
And the other thing that comes along with this reactivity model is basically anything
can become user controlled, anything that can become interactive.
And so you can take, you know, a number, like, let's say you're building an inflation calculator
or something, and you want to, like, have a given a certain amount in a certain year,
and you want to say, like, what is that value in today's dollars, rather than having to
edit the code to change what the number is, like, just replace that with a slider.
And because it's reactive, you don't have to change anything downstream, like any constant
variable can be turned into something that's interactive, or turned into something that's
animated and stuff like that.
And my because my experience from D3 was a lot of that kind of interactivity, like the
asynchronous nature of loading data, and kind of handling all of these different states,
like that was the hardest part, in a way, about making interactive visualizations.
And so if you could handle that at the language layer, or by with the runtime, then it's kind
of a simpler way of thinking about it.
Are you saying you're saying a lot of the problem was even just getting data in, yeah,
maybe doing some stuff with it before, yeah, hit the plot.
I mean, so just as a small example, like on the blocks, examples, you would, it's like
pre promises, so you would use these callback functions.
So you do like d3.json, or d3.csv, or something, and then there'd be a callback function.
And there was always this question of like, what goes in the callback function versus
like what goes outside the callback function?
What do you do if you want to load multiple data sets and join them together?
Like do you nest them together, which is slow?
Do you use another, I've read another library that's called d3q, which is like for running,
it's totally obsolete now with promises, you just say promise.all.
But there are all these kind of mechanical concerns about asynchronous state or handling
interaction that I think, you know, is just another barrier for people to produce a good
visualization.
So I wanted to think about that problem, and make it easier for people to express these
reactive or interactive programs.
I'm really curious, there's the new idea of like the observable whiteboards, and how does
that fit in?
Like, is this a next generation notebook?
Is this replacing dashboards?
Where do these whiteboards, which are like, almost sticky notes as a Jupyter notebooky
thing?
Yeah.
Where does this fit in?
So I think, you know, we have observable canvases, which has kind of been an alternative to notebooks.
And the idea is like, you know, what happens if instead of essentially like a linear layout
in a document, you have a infinite canvas, like a 2d layout?
I think it's been an interesting experiment for us to think about, like, how we can build
more UI versus building more code.
Like there are, like, there's the substrate difference, I guess, between a canvas and
a notebook.
But there's also like the different components and stuff like that.
I think after, you know, we've spent about a year on canvases, I think we are basically
heading back to notebooks at this point.
Having learned some of the innovation that we're able to get through canvases.
I think canvases was also an opportunity for us to revisit how the AI works.
And having AI being more integrated into kind of your data exploration and your visualization.
And so we have some exciting stuff that we've been working on that pulls that back into
notebooks as well.
But the challenge has been, like, having kind of fractured or disparate tools.
And so one of our lessons is, like, we want to build on, like, notebooks as the foundation.
So that you can easily move between kind of different ways of working without kind of
having disparate applications that don't work well with each other.
It sounds like you learned a lot doing canvas.
It sounds like through canvas, you learned a lot about what notebooks can give people,
maybe?
Is that?
Yeah.
I mean, I think we're always learning in terms of what's working and what's not working and
trying to kind of push that envelope in terms of how do I make this more accessible?
So I think with the reactivity, with the web-based development, I think absolutely we've made
progress in terms of making kind of interactive visualization more accessible or making web
development, let's call it, more accessible as well.
But I think, you know, there still clearly is a barrier to entry there.
And one of the questions is, like, can you solve that through UI or can you solve it
through AI?
And I think a year ago, I mean, these things are changing so quickly, but I think over
the last few years, I think we've been doing a lot of work on the UI.
And I think we've made progress, but it is very challenging to do.
No matter what the UI looks like, it feels like you're sacrificing a lot of the expressiveness
of it.
And it's very expensive to build UI.
And so even if we build a great UI for visualization, what happens if you don't know where your
data is, right?
Or you want to cross-reference data from different sources?
Often there are public datasets that you want to pull in to correlate with whatever proprietary
data that you're using.
And that's a whole nother technical challenge.
If you want to do self-serve analytics or whatever, you want to kind of bring in a broader
audience to be able to use these tools.
You can't just do the visualization part of it.
Like, it's all of the other parts that you have to support.
And so I think we've made progress in the UI, but it's just, it's been very expensive
to kind of build out enough to really make a difference in terms of the accessibility
of it.
And I think now with the advancement in AI, it feels like there's a whole new opportunity
to kind of go back to a code-based approach.
And so in a way, like we're very well situated in that these computational notebooks and
the Reactivity in particular are, you know, more human accessible form of programming,
but it turns out they work exceptionally well for the agents as well, because you can take
really complex programming problems and break them down into smaller steps, kind of run
the code incrementally, see what happens, inspect the results, and kind of iterate and
learn from that.
And ultimately the goal is that that code, even if it is produced by an agent, should
be understandable, interpretable by a human.
Like we don't want to create these black box solutions where we don't understand what it's
doing and therefore can't trust the output of it.
So I think it's nice to have this more accessible medium, even if it has the AI in there to
kind of let people write code without, you know, spending years becoming a professional
programmer.
It's so interesting, the notebook.
I feel like I've also, I've really come around to notebooks in the past year as a tool versus
like before I was doing a lot of text-based, these like R Markdown, QMD, it's like a text
document that renders.
But I do feel like the use of agents in notebooks has really, I've been thinking about it a
lot recently, and I do feel like Observable, with a lot of these experiments, and also
Observable was way ahead of the curve on this like graph, this reactive execution of
cells and things.
I'm curious your thoughts.
I know notebooks have had an interesting history with, I think, people like Joel Grews, who
famously came out against the notebook, and Jeremy Howard, who...
Well, I think specifically about the kind of the lack of reactivity in Jupyter and this
problem of like inconsistent state and stuff like that.
Yeah, yeah.
Okay.
So that's like the kind of the key.
I'm curious your thoughts on like the evolution of notebooks and what do notebooks do that's
like so useful?
Yeah.
Well, we've always been an interesting outlier, I think, not just from the reactivity side,
but also from the JavaScript side, where like we're really focused on kind of the front
end, the interface, the kind of live computation, interactive documents, interactive applications,
interactive visualization.
Yeah.
I don't know if I can speak to whatever the lessons have been from Jupiter because we've
been this kind of anomaly, in a sense.
You know, again, we have, I think, made progress in terms of making programming more accessible.
And I do think notebooks are a significant — they're a different thing than building
an application.
You know, like, they're not really a replacement for building a whole web app or building a
desktop application, but at the same time, like, there needs to be something that kind
of sits between, let's say, a full software application and, like, a Google Doc or a Word
Doc or something that's completely static.
And you know, it's great to have a live dataset or a live visualization or even, like, an
interactive model that can be embedded directly within that document so that you can kind
of tinker with the parameters and kind of see what happens.
And it's still — as I said, I think prior — my hope is that the coding agents are
really going to help make this more accessible to the broader audience.
But for the people over the last 10 years or however long that have had that skill,
have been able to do programming, I think notebooks are a really exciting medium for
explaining things and kind of making things feel more hands-on.
You know, like Brett Victor has talked about, like, being an active reader.
So you're not just kind of reading whatever the words are or whatever the numbers are
that are being fed into some equations, but you can actually interact with them like poke
and prod and see what happens if you change this.
And like, I want that not just for, let's say, some parameters that somebody might expose
in a simulation or in a model, but like, what if I edit the code?
Like going back to that kind of view source mentality where I can see how things are built
and like, what happens if I comment out this line or if I change this to that, you know,
and be able to tinker with it?
There's something fun about these documents that you — that other people have created,
that are then more interpretable and editable even by you.
Yeah, it feels like something about like — there's something around like owning the means of
production.
I found it really interesting, like I — like the R community never really used notebooks.
I think partly because we always had this interactive REPL, like that's where you do
your kind of learning and iteration, and then you record what you found in an R Markdown
recorder doc, which you then like render as a whole, like guaranteeing like reproducibility
because you're running the whole thing from scratch each time.
The thing I'm finding really interesting is with — like it does feel like AI agents change
the game a bit because now you want not just the code — you don't want to just give the
agent the code, but also the output of the code.
And that's — that seems really, really compelling.
Yes.
So that's actually the centerpiece of the new AI that we're working on, which we haven't
launched kind of to the web yet, but we did soft launch it yesterday to Observable Desktop,
which is our like desktop app.
But yeah, the key thing is that it does runtime inspection.
So when you ask the agent to do something and, you know, it generates a bunch of code
or whatever, it doesn't just assume that that code did exactly what it expected.
Like it can actually inspect any of the declared top-level variables, as well as anything that
was displayed, and it really changes the behavior of the agent.
So like one of the examples that I like to do — because it has all this innate knowledge,
right?
Like it knows the Penguin's dataset.
But the funny thing is the Penguin's dataset, sometimes it's called BillLengthMM, and sometimes
it's CullmanLengthMM, which is like a more technical name for the bridge of the bill.
And the one in Observable uses CullmanLength.
So I like to do this — kind of like I like to deliberately mislead the agent, and I ask
it to make a chart of Penguin BillLengthMM.
And so it's like, sure, here you go.
And prior to the inspection, it would like make an empty chart for you, because that
doesn't exist in the dataset.
But it would be like, perfect, you know, here's your chart, and the Adelies are like this
or whatever.
And because it can't see that it screwed up.
But now that it can inspect it, it notices that like, hey, there's something missing
here from this chart.
And it then goes and like inspects the dataset and says, oh, wait a second, like this has
different columns than I expected.
And then it goes ahead and does the correct chart.
And there's so many other examples like this where, you know, it's working with some dataset
and it's just slightly different than it expected.
And the fact that it can actually verify that and then correct for it makes it much more
robust.
Have you seen our BluffBench?
Simon Couch and Sarah Altman did this for us, where we kind of noticed like, the LLMs
are like pretty lazy at reading the plots.
And often they'll just effectively like read the axis labels and then based on the kind
of like if you do a plot of fuel economy and then ask it like what's going on, it just
tells you the expected relationship between engine size and fuel economy without actually
looking at the plot.
It can be very dangerous because it has that kind of innate understanding.
And also I think they tend to be too optimistic in a sense where like either is you wrote
the code and it assumes you know what you're doing or it wrote the code and it assumes
it knows what it's doing.
And so yeah, you do have to kind of nudge it to be a little bit more discerning in looking
at that output because we found that even when it could see the output, like if we didn't
tell it that it really needed to review it and make sure that it did what it expected,
it wouldn't do well.
And then similarly, so one of the big challenges with runtime inspection, particularly working
with data, is you have large datasets, right?
So you have, you know, hundreds of megabytes or even more of datasets you might have loaded
into memory.
Obviously, you can't fit that entire thing into the context.
And even for an SVG, like if you have lots and lots of circles or lines or whatever,
like that can be many kilobytes as well.
And so we've written some kind of interesting code to inspect those arbitrary values that
hopefully does a good job of kind of giving it a broad overview, like deep enough that
it can kind of see some examples but not see everything.
But you also have to tell it like whether or not it's truncated.
Because, you know, if it thinks that that might be truncated, it'll just assume everything's
fine.
It's like, oh, everything's fine.
I just can't see anything, you know, but it's like you have to tell it what it's looking
at and tell it to be more discerning.
And have you all had to dig a lot into like evals, whether with a capital E or lowercase
E, like if you change the software, the prompts, how does the agent's behavior change?
Yeah, very much.
In a way, that's like a flashback to what I was talking about earlier, working on search
quality.
The Google eval.
Yeah.
No, for sure that we have like these eval suites that we run.
I think, you know, they are helpful, but we need a lot more in a sense, like, you know,
and we need, as I said, we just like soft launched it yesterday.
So like more people using it, I think we'll hopefully get feedback from real users who
share their work with us and kind of get feedback that way.
But I think you're right.
You like you need some way of knowing when you make a change to your harness or to the
prompts or whatever, like what is the actual effect of that?
And if you don't have the evals, then you're basically going blind, like whatever you're
testing manually.
Maybe that works great.
But all these other things that people will encounter once you make that change, you're
not aware of those changes that you're making.
It is very like that's the most, I think, frustrating thing about working on agents
is just nobody really understands how they work or what you should be doing or like you
would change one thing and who knows what the effect is going to be.
So if you don't have evals, you're really operating blind.
Yeah.
I do appreciate, though, that the Palmer's Penguins dataset is doing its part, like playing
it's, you know, it's doing its part in making sure the agents do their job well.
Yeah.
It's really hard to write good evals as well, we've discovered.
So, you know, you have these different, I mean, first of all, even if you set the temperature
to zero, like it still does change, I mean, you know, like your system prompt includes
the current date in it.
So that's like one way that things can be different.
But who knows, like what the other underlying instabilities are in there.
But the challenges with writing the evals are basically like how specific are your assertions
and how specific are your prompts?
Because when you have failures, you know, your choices are like, do I make my assertions
more general?
Like basically, do I enumerate more and more of the various things that I've seen that
are acceptable?
Or do I somehow like try to make them more general?
Or do I kind of change the prompt and make the prompt much more specific?
So like one of the examples that we run into is that the agent is just like happily keeps
going, you know, like it just keeps showing you more and more things.
If you ask it kind of too open-ended a question, it can easily run for, you know, a few minutes
or whatever, generating different views and stuff like that.
And so if you want to have an eval that runs efficiently and has like a 30 second timeout
or something like that, you do have to be a little bit more specific to tell the agent
to kind of wrap it up and be concise in its response.
But of course, the danger is that if you are too specific in your prompts, then they're
no longer kind of representative of what users will do.
And so again, having that external feedback, like having real users using it, is essential
to know whether your evals are really representative of actual usage or not.
Yeah, that makes sense.
And I know you also, oh, did you have a, you sure?
Yeah.
All right.
Last chance, you know.
I know this might also tie into, I saw you wrote a blog post on playing safely with fire
last year.
Yeah.
I'd be curious to hear.
Which is about AI, by the way.
Yeah, sorry.
Not about fire.
Not actually.
You wrote this beautiful blog post about arson that really spoke to me.
I'm curious, you've mentioned so much about evals and this use of agents and notebooks.
I'd be curious, maybe you could recap a little bit about the blog post.
and whether any of your thoughts have changed or stayed the same? Because I know so much has
happened in the last year. Yeah. Well, the main thing is really about interpretability,
verifiability, and trust. You know, I think
Certainly, the models, the coding agents, are somewhat miraculous or magic in what they
can do, but are also clearly capable of misleading you if not lying to you.
They can be sycophantic.
They can assume things are working when they're not or just make stuff up and all that sort
of stuff.
So I think while they are very exciting as a technology, I think it's easy to be misled
by them as well.
And certainly there's a lot of hype around it as well.
And so I think our take is coming back to that, you know, how do we make it a more human
medium for computation, for programming?
And so if we're incorporating AI into that, it has to be about how does a human understand
what the agent is doing and how do we make it more verifiable?
And in a way, a lot of what we're doing now, I think bringing the agents into notebooks
and kind of having this code-first way of working, is trying to, in a sense, shift some
of the agent thinking into code, because that is a more formal specification, a more verifiable
specification.
So I have this kind of saying where the agent can lie to you with text, but it can't lie
to you with code.
In the sense of, you know, if you ask it something, you're like, what are my top customers or
something like that?
And it just gives you a markdown bullet list.
You know, who knows if that's right?
You need to cross-reference it with an actual query in order to know whether that's correct.
If it gives you code, you have the problem of whether or not the code is relevant.
But assuming that the code runs and is relevant to the question, you can generally trust that
the query will behave deterministically, kind of give you the results that you expect.
And so in that sense, we're trying to get the agent to shift more of its thinking to
code.
Hopefully that code is still interpretable, but that way it's more verifiable and trustworthy
and reproducible.
I heard the idea of the, you know, agents enable like code backed data science nowadays
where it really is your source of truth and being able to use them more effectively than
just some sort of markdown list, like you said, and being able to really verify that
this is correct.
This is what we want.
I think it's really powerful in a world where it feels maybe uncertain, you know, where
is code going?
But having that as a source of truth.
Yeah, absolutely.
It's interesting, you know, because there was this whole like no code, low code movement
before and I think we were on the peripheral of that working on kind of UI cells and notebooks
and stuff like that.
And I think in a way it's liberating to come back to code as like this sure foundation,
like this reliable thing, this powerful expressive thing.
And now we're much more specifically focused on, okay, we're not hiding the code or taking
away the code or abstracting the code, but how can we help people learn how to do that
code?
And I think there is a difference between writing code and reading code, like in terms
of the challenge, the barrier to entry there.
And so I think, you know, even if you can't write code, if we can teach you to read code
and review code, you know, that broadens the audience of who can do this.
I think it does feel like tremendously cool for us that have been trying to like persuade
people about the magic of code for like so long.
And now it's like easier than ever for anyone to like access it, which is like really like
genuinely cool and enabling and democratizing.
Yeah, absolutely.
I think that's the most exciting aspect of it because it's not, I think my hope is that
people don't just purely rely on the agent to do all of the work.
Like if it helps them get over that initial hurdle and then they're like, oh, if I learn
a little bit more about how this is working, then I can get more hands on here.
And it really, you know, helps you kind of scale up your expertise.
I do think the other thing that I just find really cool is now you can interact with an
agent in like any human language and like it speaks back to you in your language.
And I think that's also like really cool.
Like we never would have been able to like translate all of the documentation, all of
the UI and all of these different languages.
But now, you know, it's the translation's not perfect, but just again, like tremendously
enabling for people.
Interesting.
Like as a tool builder, does this change how we're building tools?
Does it make it feel like we want to have them be more readable, like maybe more scrutinous
of the APIs that we're writing as people are just looking at this maybe from a slightly
more outside point of view?
Yeah, I think that's a really, really interesting question about how we design the agents and
how we kind of guide them to do certain types of code or certain libraries.
So most top of mind for us is kind of when you're asking the agent to do a visualization,
you know, is it going to use D3 or is it going to use plot?
In general, we very much try to bias it towards plot because plot is a higher level abstraction
like grammar of graphics.
It is, you know, there are certain things that you can't really do in plot, at least
not yet.
Like there's no tree maps in plot, for example.
And so there are certain things that you do need to use D3 to use those.
But in general, we try to bias it towards plot because if it is able to use plot, it's
much more likely to produce a good output, a correct, like non-buggy, but also just a
better designed output.
Like they look better, they have better tooltips that are built in, they kind of make better
choices by default and all that sort of thing.
So I think it is important still the design of these abstractions, designs of those libraries.
It's not like it can use D3 to do all of the things that you can do in plot.
It's just much harder to get it to produce as good of an output with D3 as it is with
plot.
There's also a really good feedback loop in place where you ask it to do something and
it makes a mistake.
And then you're like, my choice is I can either change the prompt to teach the AI to do something
differently, teach the agent to do something differently.
Or I can go back to plot and add a new feature to plot or add some better defaults or better
warnings or something like that.
And it's fun to have that instantaneous feedback where you just, you change the feature, you
change the library and you can immediately test it against the agent with all these different
evals.
And it kind of helps you.
Yeah, it's another feedback loop to stress test the design of your interfaces.
Are the agents pretty good at sticking with plot or where does the path of desire go for
agents?
Do they want plot or D3?
I mean, I don't know how much of it is the prompt that we've given it.
It definitely sticks to plot pretty reliably.
And I think a big part of that is just the whole like observable community and all the
public notebooks that have kind of fed into these models, like it really does have a pretty
good understanding of both how D3 works and how plot works.
But of course, we've given it instruction recommending the use of plot for most of its
visualization work.
And that kind of for the more advanced stuff, you know, the tree maps, as I mentioned, or
some of the more like animations that'll use D3 for that.
Because the other obvious advantage of plot is like it's easier for humans to read that
rather than trying to fully understand what the D3 code is.
And that's part of our goal.
Like I want it to produce something that is interpretable and kind of teaches you how
to use plot and kind of because you're going to want to do that refinement as well, right?
So if you are looking at the output of a chart, but if you can see what the specification
is, that might give you some hints as to how to guide the agent when you want to refine
it.
When I think everyone too now has had this experience where you've got like, yeah, the
AI has produced something that's like 95% what you want.
And you like ask for one very simple thing to get it to 100% and it like makes it worse.
And you just get like stuck in that, like trying to prompt it to do the right thing.
But often like when the code's right there, you're like, okay, we'll just change that.
That's easy.
Like it's explicit.
I don't get stuck in this like really frustrating loop where the agent just seems so dumb.
So we have some cool stuff that we haven't announced yet, but it's reminding me of it.
And basically what we're working on is kind of like a REPL compliment to a notebook.
And the idea is that the REPL, which is actually, we call it chat, is basically like an agent
first way of developing with it, where you're kind of, all of your messages are going to
the agent and the agent is like replying with live code that runs in the chat.
And it's great for experimentation and kind of ideation.
You don't have to worry about it kind of destroying things because it can only add to the conversation.
And it clearly puts the emphasis on like, just ask it questions.
Like it's not the same as it's much less intimidating than opening up a notebook where like the
first thing you see is a blinking cursor and a code cell and you're like, what even goes
in here?
Like, it's just ask a question and the agent will give you an answer.
But that doesn't kind of scale up to beyond the 95% case.
Like it's really not good for refinement where you get something that's pretty close, but
then you could go through like 20 different charts that all get added to the conversation
and it becomes a mess, it becomes slow.
And so the way that we've designed it is these chats are actually just a different interface
for notebooks.
And so you can transition into a notebook and then you can switch into this refinement
model.
And that's what lets you kind of edit in place and hopefully get to that 100% case.
Yeah, I was thinking about this morning because I was using Gemini to make a logo and it like
put a white background and I'm like, please make the background transparent.
And so in the background, it just drew like the white and gray squares, like when you
often see.
And I was like, no, like make it transparent, like it just does not.
And that's just like so intensely frustrating when you're like, you've done this amazing
job.
I've given you this really vague, ill-defined thing.
You've killed it.
And now I'm asking you for the small concrete change and you like.
just cannot do it. It's like, it's fascinating. Yeah.
I love when it tries to bamboozle you through like smoke and mirrors, you know?
Yeah.
I figured, one thing I'm really curious about is, we talked a lot about the tools and your
approaches. I'm really curious about just how you unwind. Like, how do you unwind after a long day?
of cooking up visualizations.
So I started strength training
like spring of last year, and I think that has been
super fun, and I've really enjoyed that. I think, you know, I've always
considered myself somewhat of a nerd, I guess, and like pooh-poohed
to like people that go to the gym and work out, but like, it's so fun.
I love it. Do you have like a trainer? Yeah, I go to a trainer
twice a week, and it's really good for motivating. I mean, it's hard.
I was doing a lot of running for a while. Also, running is more
less enjoyable for me. I feel like it's just suffering, but you feel really good afterwards.
Whereas the trainer, like the strength training, I enjoy it in the moment as well.
But it definitely helps to have a trainer, like in terms of, you know, you've got
this pre-existing commitment, like you can't just decide not to show up.
I mean, you could, I guess, but like it's this pressure to show up. And also, like
they're really good at kind of giving you, like making it
interesting, like doing new things. I think if you're just doing strength training by yourself,
it's easy to have like, I have three or four exercises that I do, and I do those every time.
And then it just gets boring. And even though like I've been doing it for a year now, like twice
a week, like I feel like every workout is different. Like I'm doing exercises that
I haven't done before, and that makes it exciting. And you feel like you're getting
kind of better coverage in terms of the muscles that you're growing.
Yeah. It's so cool. Do the trainers also cover like
diet? Like do they, are you doing, how are your macros?
I don't worry about that too much. I mean, I, there's
only so much that you can do, right? I mean, yeah. But
in a way, like I got into the strength training because I had a lot of back problems, actually.
And I was doing a lot of biking. I was commuting by bike, and I don't know if that was helping,
but just, you know, sitting at a desk, like sitting at your computer for however
many hours a day, it's just not good for your body. And
I think what's been most successful for
me with the strength training, I mean, knock on wood, is that like I've not really had any back
problems for months. And like that is gold to me. Like I don't really care about
all the other stuff as well. But it's, I really do recommend
it. I think it's fantastic. There's been some, there's some really cool videos
of like people starting strength training, like in their 70s and 80s.
And like, it's amazingly empowering. My parents have just
started strength training now. Yeah, it's like so empowering. And like you get
like, you're never going to be like, you know, competing in strength competitions,
but it still makes you so much healthier. Yeah, no, the
robustness, like the mobility that you feel, like just walking around, like bending
over and picking stuff up. It really is life-changing.
Yeah. Have you and your parents ever hit the gym? Have you like,
they just started in the last couple weeks. They're not at your level yet, is
what you're saying. No. Yeah, I want to see
my dad doing the deadlift, but I think they're doing well.
I play tennis with them. I mean, they play a lot of tennis. Okay.
Yeah, that's cool. Do they like school you?
Um, this is getting a little personal.
You know, it's hard to play tennis with your
parents because it's such a mind game. You know, I, I, I didn't play that much
right now, but I played a lot in high school and I always felt
like thrown off. Like when I would try to play with my parents, like
my dad can play very aggressively, you know, but it's not
as reliable. Whereas my mom is like, just
she never misses a shot, you know, like it. And so she's not hitting it that
hard, but like at some point you're going to make a mistake and she's going to win.
She's in your mind. Yeah. And so it's like the mind game
gets me. And I think that's, I always struggled with that aspect of tennis.
Yeah. I feel like that's a good relationship too, for your parent to be like, I'm
in your mind and I'm going to school you. You don't know when, you know?
Um, no, I love it. You know, like you, there's just that pressure of
like, you know, wanting to meet your parents' expectations. Yeah.
And like now you're in direct competition with that. Right. You're like locking horns.
You don't know what to do. Exactly. Yeah. Yeah. Isabel, can you just explain to Mike
the brief adventure you and Claude Code went on? Yeah. So, um,
doing research for this, um, I found, I was going through old GitHub repositories and I did
find a game called Polly Be Gone. Oh yeah. Um, that has been rehydrated by
Claude. If you would like to play it after, I have it on my laptop. It is working.
That's great. I also can't get past the first level. Okay. Awesome. Yes.
Let's play this afterwards because it stopped working in some like macOS update and I've
been meaning to like get it working again, but, um, I couldn't, I didn't spend the time
to figure it out, but yeah, so that was from a computer graphics
class at Stanford and they had a video game competition
as the final project for that. Um, and I was, I've always been into kind of
like the physics simulation, like for relay integration stuff. Like there's a
many body, uh, horns, but, uh, is that right?
Anyway, um, the, the, uh, what is it called? Like the
quadtree it's for simulating kind of mutual effects
of gravity when you have either particles or stars
or whatever. Like I'm just at the level of like seeing what seemed to be a battery rolling around
it. Yeah. Well, I guess like a hoverboard
predates hoverboards probably shows you how old it is. But, um, I
think what's fun about those is you have these very simple rules
like you have mass and you have velocity and you have
friction and stuff like that. And if you just define what these simple rules are, you can get all sorts
of interesting kind of dynamic behavior that results out of it. Um,
and so that game, you know, you control this robot and you basically can like
add force to the wheels independently. I guess it drives like a tank so you
can go forwards and backwards and you kind of have it spin around, but it has momentum. And so it can
like launch itself off of ramps. It has like some rolling
cylinders that you can drive across and like some flippy
boards that like throws it into the air and it was just a lot.
We did not get to the flippy boards. There's a great MIDI soundtrack on it as well.
Honestly, I was like, I'm in it for the soundtrack. Totally. Um, and there is
definitely a feeling of mass about this little poly. It's very light. It really goes
flying if you send it. And you can be like pretty creative. I mean, it's not a
long game. Let's be clear. There's only like eight rooms in it or something like that. But there are a couple
different ways of solving the rooms and that come out of like
constructed behavior. Like there are jumps that you can make that I didn't anticipate
but that come out of like whatever the physics. I'll have to put up a pull request after this.
There's a fun visualization feature in that as well where if you
like replay a room, like so you can often like die, you know, 50, 60 times
or whatever trying to get across a room, but there's some button that you can hit and it will show you all
of the paths that you've taken through the room so you can see all of the ways that you've died.
We'll have to share out Poly Be Gone, you know,
Restore, Remastered, 2026 edition.
Yeah, buy it on Steam.
Yeah, Mike, thanks so much for coming on to the test set. I think honestly it's incredible to hear about
D3 and just all your work from like Google
Evals, single number, people in a room debating to
like how do we, what's the future of data analysis and visualization
in these reactive notebooks? Yeah, I'm so curious
for what y'all will launch and really appreciate you
coming on. Thank you. It's been a lot of fun. I've enjoyed it.
Thank you.